Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the control of cardiac output. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Define cardiac output and state its determinants.
Cardiac output is the volume of blood pumped by the heart per minute,
the central measure of the circulation's performance,
since it is the flow delivering oxygen and nutrients to the tissues.
It is the product of two factors: the heart rate, the number of beats per minute,
and the stroke volume, the volume ejected by the ventricle in each beat.
So cardiac output equals heart rate times stroke volume.
A typical resting value is around five litres per minute — a heart rate of about
seventy and a stroke volume of about seventy millilitres.
To allow comparison between individuals of different size,
it is often indexed to body surface area as the cardiac index.
The stroke volume is itself determined by three factors — the preload,
the afterload, and the contractility — while the heart rate is set by the pacemaker
and its autonomic control.
So cardiac output, the blood pumped per minute and normally about five litres,
is the product of heart rate and stroke volume;
the heart rate set by the pacemaker and autonomic control,
and the stroke volume by preload, afterload and contractility — these being the
variables through which cardiac output is regulated.
Describe preload and Frank-Starling's law of the heart.
Preload is the degree of stretch of the ventricular muscle at the end of diastole,
just before contraction, determined by the volume of blood filling the ventricle —
the end-diastolic volume — and so by the venous return.
Its importance lies in Frank-Starling's law of the heart, which states that,
within limits, the greater the stretch of the cardiac muscle at the end of filling,
the greater the force of the subsequent contraction and so the stroke volume.
The mechanism is the length-tension relationship of cardiac muscle:
increased stretch brings the actin and myosin filaments to a more favourable
overlap and increases the sensitivity of the filaments to calcium,
so more force is generated.
Plotted as the stroke volume, or cardiac output,
on the vertical axis against the preload, or end-diastolic volume,
on the horizontal axis, the relationship is the Frank-Starling curve — rising
steeply then flattening.
Its great value is that it automatically matches the output of the heart to its
venous return, beat by beat, and balances the two ventricles.
So preload is the end-diastolic stretch, set by venous return,
and Frank-Starling's law states that greater stretch produces a greater force and
stroke volume, through the length-tension relationship — the rising Frank-Starling
curve — automatically matching cardiac output to venous return and balancing the
ventricles.
Describe afterload and its effect on the heart.
Afterload is the load against which the ventricle must work to eject blood — in
effect, the wall stress the ventricle must develop during ejection,
determined chiefly by the arterial pressure it must overcome to open the aortic
valve and eject, and so largely by the systemic vascular resistance,
though also by the ventricular size and wall thickness.
Its effect follows from the physics of the heart as a pump:
a higher afterload opposes ejection,
so for a given contractility and preload the ventricle ejects less and empties less
completely, increasing the end-systolic volume and reducing the stroke volume.
The wall stress is described by the law of Laplace:
the tension in the wall is proportional to the pressure within and the radius of
the chamber, and inversely proportional to the wall thickness;
so a dilated ventricle faces a higher wall stress for the same pressure,
increasing its work and oxygen demand.
A chronically raised afterload leads to hypertrophy.
So afterload is the load opposing ejection,
chiefly the arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance,
and a higher afterload reduces the stroke volume and, by Laplace's law,
raises wall stress and oxygen demand — especially in the dilated ventricle — an
important determinant of cardiac performance and workload.
Describe contractility and how it is assessed.
Contractility, or the inotropic state,
is the intrinsic strength of contraction of the cardiac muscle independent of the
loading conditions of preload and afterload — that is,
the force the heart generates for a given fibre length.
An increase in contractility means the heart contracts more forcefully and ejects
more completely at any given preload and afterload, increasing the stroke volume.
It is increased by sympathetic stimulation and circulating catecholamines,
acting through beta-one receptors to raise intracellular calcium,
and by certain drugs — the inotropes; it is decreased by myocardial disease,
hypoxia, acidosis, and most anaesthetic agents.
Because it must be assessed independently of load,
it is difficult to measure directly;
the best load-independent index is the slope of the end-systolic pressure-volume
relationship on the pressure-volume loop,
a steeper slope indicating greater contractility.
Other indices, such as the ejection fraction and the rate of pressure rise,
are used but are load-dependent.
So contractility is the intrinsic, load-independent strength of cardiac
contraction, increased by sympathetic activity,
catecholamines and inotropes and decreased by disease, hypoxia,
acidosis and anaesthetics; best assessed by the load-independent slope of the
end-systolic pressure-volume relationship,
though load-dependent indices such as the ejection fraction are used clinically.
How do heart rate and rhythm affect cardiac output?
Heart rate is one of the two direct determinants of cardiac output, so that,
other things being equal, increasing the rate increases the output — the principal
means by which output is raised in exercise.
However, the relationship is not limitless,
because the rate affects the time available for filling.
At very high rates, diastole — the filling time — is so shortened that the
ventricle cannot fill adequately, so the stroke volume falls and the cardiac output
may plateau or even decline; this is especially important when filling is already
impaired.
Rate also has subtler effects: an increase in rate itself modestly increases
contractility — the Bowditch, or treppe, effect.
Rhythm matters too: the normal coordinated contraction,
with the atrial contribution to filling — the atrial kick — optimises output,
so the loss of effective atrial contraction, as in atrial fibrillation,
or the loss of coordination, reduces output,
particularly when filling is dependent on the atrial contribution.
So heart rate directly raises cardiac output but only until excessive rates shorten
filling and reduce stroke volume; rate also modestly affects contractility,
and an effective coordinated rhythm with the atrial contribution to filling
optimises output — its disturbance, as in atrial fibrillation, reducing it.
Describe venous return and its relationship to cardiac output.
Venous return is the flow of blood back to the heart,
and over any sustained period it must equal the cardiac output,
since the circulation is a closed circuit — the heart can only pump out what
returns to it.
Venous return is driven by the pressure gradient from the periphery back to the
right atrium: the mean systemic filling pressure,
the pressure in the system that depends on the blood volume and the venous tone,
drives blood back towards the right atrial pressure,
against the resistance to venous return.
So venous return is increased by a higher blood volume or venous tone,
raising the filling pressure, and by a lower right atrial pressure;
it is aided by the skeletal muscle pump, the respiratory pump and venous valves.
The interplay is represented by plotting the cardiac function curve — cardiac
output rising with right atrial pressure by Starling's law — together with the
venous return curve — venous return falling as right atrial pressure rises;
the point where they intersect is the operating point,
the steady-state cardiac output and right atrial pressure.
So venous return, which must equal cardiac output,
is driven by the gradient from the mean systemic filling pressure to the right
atrium; the intersection of the cardiac function and venous return curves defines
the operating cardiac output — emphasising that output depends on the return of
blood as well as the pump.
How is cardiac output regulated as an integrated system?
Cardiac output is regulated by the integration of all these factors to match the
delivery of blood to the body's demand,
combining intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms.
The intrinsic mechanism is Frank-Starling's law,
which automatically adjusts the stroke volume to the venous return beat by beat,
balancing the ventricles and accommodating changes in filling without any external
signal.
The extrinsic mechanisms are chiefly autonomic and hormonal:
the sympathetic system increases heart rate, contractility and venous tone,
and the parasympathetic slows the rate,
together adjusting output rapidly to demand — as in exercise,
where output may rise four- or five-fold through increased rate and stroke volume.
The system also depends on adequate venous return,
influenced by blood volume and venous tone.
These are coordinated by the cardiovascular centres in response to the
baroreceptors and other inputs.
So cardiac output is regulated by the integration of the intrinsic Frank-Starling
matching of output to venous return with the extrinsic autonomic and hormonal
control of rate, contractility and venous tone,
coordinated centrally — matching the cardiac output to the body's demand,
as in the large increase during exercise.
What is the relevance of the control of cardiac output to anaesthesia?
The control of cardiac output is at the heart of anaesthetic practice,
because maintaining cardiac output, and hence oxygen delivery and organ perfusion,
is a central aim, and because anaesthesia disturbs every one of its determinants.
Anaesthetic agents reduce contractility, reduce venous tone and venous return,
and alter heart rate and the autonomic reflexes,
all tending to reduce cardiac output and blood pressure.
The anaesthetist manages this by manipulating the same determinants:
optimising preload with fluids guided by the Frank-Starling principle and fluid
responsiveness; adjusting afterload with vasoconstrictors or vasodilators;
supporting contractility with inotropes; and controlling rate and rhythm.
Understanding the framework guides the diagnosis and treatment of hypotension and
shock — deciding whether the problem is preload, afterload, contractility or rate.
So the control of cardiac output is central to anaesthesia:
anaesthesia disturbs contractility, venous return, rate and the reflexes,
and the anaesthetist maintains cardiac output and perfusion by manipulating
preload, afterload, contractility and rate — the determinants of cardiac output
providing the framework for managing the circulation and treating hypotension and
shock.
Pull it together: how is cardiac output matched to the body's needs?
I would draw it together around cardiac output as the regulated delivery of blood,
matched to demand by the coordinated control of its determinants.
Cardiac output is the product of heart rate and stroke volume.
The stroke volume is set by preload — the venous return,
acting through Frank-Starling's law to match output to return automatically;
by afterload — the arterial load opposing ejection;
and by contractility — the intrinsic strength, raised by sympathetic activity.
The heart rate is set by the pacemaker and its autonomic control.
These are integrated: the intrinsic Starling mechanism balances the ventricles and
matches output to return, while the extrinsic autonomic and hormonal mechanisms
adjust rate, contractility and venous tone to demand,
coordinated by the cardiovascular centres responding to the baroreceptors.
The closed circuit ensures output equals venous return.
Thus, in exercise, output rises severalfold; in haemorrhage or anaesthesia,
the mechanisms defend it.
So cardiac output is matched to the body's needs by the integrated control of heart
rate and stroke volume — the intrinsic Frank-Starling matching of output to venous
return combined with extrinsic autonomic and hormonal adjustment of rate,
contractility and venous tone — a coordinated system maintaining the delivery of
blood to the tissues.
State the Fick principle and how it measures cardiac output.
The Fick principle is a method of measuring cardiac output based on the
conservation of mass, applied to the uptake of a substance by an organ.
In words, the principle states that the amount of a substance taken up by an organ
per unit time equals the blood flow through that organ multiplied by the difference
in the concentration of the substance between the blood entering and the blood
leaving.
Applied to the whole body using oxygen:
the oxygen consumed by the body per minute equals the cardiac output multiplied by
the difference between the oxygen content of the arterial blood and that of the
mixed venous blood.
Rearranging, the cardiac output equals the oxygen consumption divided by the
arteriovenous oxygen content difference.
So by measuring the oxygen consumption — from the inspired and expired gas — and
the arterial and mixed venous oxygen contents, the cardiac output can be calculated.
So the Fick principle states that the uptake of a substance equals the flow times
the arteriovenous concentration difference; applied to oxygen,
the cardiac output equals the oxygen consumption divided by the arteriovenous
oxygen content difference — a method of measuring cardiac output founded on the
conservation of mass, and the basis of several techniques.
Describe the methods of measuring cardiac output.
Cardiac output can be measured by several methods,
of differing invasiveness and principle, important in managing the seriously ill.
The Fick method, just described, uses oxygen uptake and the arteriovenous oxygen
difference.
The indicator-dilution methods inject a known amount of an indicator into the
circulation and measure its concentration downstream over time;
the cardiac output is calculated from the dose and the area under the resulting
concentration-time curve.
The most widely used clinical version is thermodilution,
using the pulmonary artery catheter:
a bolus of cold fluid is injected into the right atrium and the resulting
temperature change is measured downstream in the pulmonary artery,
the cardiac output being derived from the temperature-time curve.
Less invasive methods have largely superseded it:
oesophageal Doppler measures the velocity of blood in the descending aorta;
arterial pulse-contour analysis derives the stroke volume from the arterial
waveform; and echocardiography estimates it from dimensions and flow velocities.
So cardiac output is measured by the Fick method,
by indicator dilution — classically thermodilution via the pulmonary artery
catheter — and increasingly by less invasive means: oesophageal Doppler,
arterial pulse-contour analysis and echocardiography;
a range of techniques allowing the cardiac output to be monitored and optimised in
the seriously ill and in major surgery.
Describe the venous return curve and the mean systemic filling pressure.
The venous return curve is a graphical representation of how the venous return
depends on the right atrial pressure,
central to Guyton's analysis of the circulation,
and it introduces the important concept of the mean systemic filling pressure.
Plotted as venous return on the vertical axis against right atrial pressure on the
horizontal axis, the curve slopes downward: as the right atrial pressure rises,
the gradient driving blood back to the heart falls, so the venous return falls;
conversely, a lower right atrial pressure increases venous return.
The curve meets the horizontal axis at the mean systemic filling pressure — the
pressure that would exist throughout the systemic circulation if the heart stopped
and the blood redistributed, determined by the blood volume and the venous tone,
normally around seven millimetres of mercury.
This pressure is the upstream pressure driving venous return; raising it,
by increasing volume or venous tone,
shifts the whole curve and increases venous return at any right atrial pressure.
So the venous return curve shows venous return falling as right atrial pressure
rises, meeting the axis at the mean systemic filling pressure — the pressure set by
blood volume and venous tone that drives the return;
a framework showing that venous return, and so cardiac output,
depends on the filling pressure and the right atrial pressure,
not on the heart alone.
How do the cardiac function and venous return curves interact to determine cardiac
output?
The determination of cardiac output is elegantly shown by plotting the cardiac
function curve and the venous return curve together on the same axes,
in Guyton's analysis, because the two must be satisfied simultaneously.
Both are plotted against the right atrial pressure on the horizontal axis.
The cardiac function curve — essentially the Frank-Starling curve — shows the
cardiac output rising as the right atrial pressure, the filling pressure, rises.
The venous return curve shows the venous return falling as the right atrial
pressure rises.
Because in the steady state the cardiac output must equal the venous return,
the operating point of the circulation is where the two curves intersect — the
unique right atrial pressure and flow at which the heart pumps exactly what returns
to it.
This framework shows clearly how interventions act:
increasing the blood volume or venous tone shifts the venous return curve upward
and rightward, raising the cardiac output;
increasing contractility shifts the cardiac function curve upward,
raising output and lowering the right atrial pressure.
So the cardiac function and venous return curves,
plotted together against right atrial pressure,
intersect at the operating point where cardiac output equals venous return;
this intersection determines the cardiac output and shows how changes in volume,
venous tone and contractility move it — a powerful integrated model of the
circulation.
Describe the cardiovascular response to exercise.
The cardiovascular response to exercise is a striking example of the integrated
regulation of the circulation, dramatically increasing the delivery of oxygen to
the working muscles.
The cardiac output rises greatly — up to four- or five-fold,
or more in the athlete — achieved by an increase in both the heart rate,
through increased sympathetic and reduced parasympathetic activity,
and the stroke volume, through increased contractility and increased venous return
aided by the muscle pump.
The blood flow is redistributed: the arterioles of the active muscles dilate
through metabolic autoregulation, greatly increasing muscle flow,
while flow to the gut and other non-essential areas is reduced by sympathetic
vasoconstriction, and skin flow rises for heat loss.
The systemic vascular resistance falls overall because of the muscle
vasodilatation, but the mean arterial pressure is maintained or rises modestly
because the large rise in cardiac output offsets the fall in resistance.
Oxygen extraction also increases.
So in exercise the cardiac output rises severalfold through increased heart rate
and stroke volume, blood is redistributed to the working muscles by metabolic
vasodilatation with sympathetic constriction elsewhere,
the systemic resistance falls but pressure is maintained by the raised output,
and oxygen extraction rises — an integrated response delivering greatly increased
oxygen to the muscles, and a measure of cardiovascular reserve.
Describe the effects of posture and of positive-pressure ventilation on cardiac
output.
Both posture and positive-pressure ventilation affect cardiac output chiefly by
their influence on venous return, illustrating the dependence of output on filling.
On standing from lying, gravity causes blood to pool in the dependent veins of the
legs, reducing venous return and so, by Frank-Starling,
the stroke volume and cardiac output, and tending to lower the blood pressure;
this is normally corrected within seconds by the baroreceptor reflex,
raising heart rate and vascular tone,
but if the reflex is impaired — as by anaesthesia or autonomic failure — a postural
fall in pressure results.
Positive-pressure ventilation, in contrast to normal negative-pressure breathing,
raises the intrathoracic pressure during inspiration;
this raised pressure impedes the venous return to the chest,
reducing right ventricular filling and so cardiac output,
an effect exaggerated by high airway pressures,
by a high positive end-expiratory pressure, and by hypovolaemia.
So posture affects cardiac output through venous return — standing pools blood and
reduces it, normally corrected by the baroreflex — and positive-pressure
ventilation reduces cardiac output by raising intrathoracic pressure and impeding
venous return, especially with high pressures and hypovolaemia;
both illustrating the central role of venous return,
and both highly relevant to the anaesthetised, ventilated patient.
What is cardiac reserve, and how is it relevant?
Cardiac reserve is the capacity of the heart to increase its output above the
resting level to meet increased demand, expressed as the difference, or ratio,
between the maximum achievable cardiac output and the resting output.
In the healthy person, the heart can increase its output severalfold — a large
reserve — by increasing heart rate and stroke volume,
allowing the great increases needed in exercise.
This reserve is important clinically because it is reduced by cardiac disease:
a failing heart may maintain an adequate output at rest but have little or no
reserve to meet increased demand, so that it cannot cope with the stress of
exercise, illness, or surgery and anaesthesia, which impose increased demands.
The assessment of cardiac, and more broadly cardiopulmonary,
reserve — for example by exercise capacity or formal testing — is therefore central
to assessing a patient's fitness for surgery and their risk,
since those with poor reserve tolerate the perioperative stresses badly.
So cardiac reserve is the heart's capacity to increase its output above rest to
meet demand, large in health but reduced by cardiac disease; its assessment,
through exercise capacity and testing,
is central to evaluating fitness for surgery,
since limited reserve predicts poor tolerance of the increased demands of the
perioperative period.
Summarise the integrated determinants of cardiac output and their clinical
manipulation.
I would summarise it as the integration of the heart's determinants with the
circulation that fills it, manipulated clinically through the same variables.
Cardiac output is heart rate times stroke volume;
the stroke volume is set by preload, afterload and contractility.
But the heart can only pump what returns to it,
so the output is equally determined by the venous return,
which depends on the mean systemic filling pressure — set by blood volume and
venous tone — and the right atrial pressure,
the operating point being where the cardiac function and venous return curves
intersect.
The whole is regulated by the intrinsic Frank-Starling,
Anrep and Bowditch mechanisms and by autonomic and hormonal control,
matched to demand as in exercise.
Clinically, the anaesthetist manipulates these:
optimising preload with fluids and venous tone, reducing or supporting afterload,
supporting contractility with inotropes,
and controlling rate and rhythm — diagnosing which determinant is at fault in
hypotension or shock.
So cardiac output is determined by the integration of the heart's preload,
afterload, contractility and rate with the venous return that fills it,
regulated intrinsically and by the autonomic system, and matched to demand;
clinically it is manipulated through these same determinants to maintain perfusion
— the unifying framework for managing the circulation.
Describe the measurement of cardiac output by the Fick principle.
The Fick principle is a method of measuring cardiac output,
or indeed the blood flow to any organ, founded on the conservation of mass,
and it is a classic of physiology.
The principle states that the amount of a substance taken up or released by an
organ per unit time equals the blood flow to that organ multiplied by the
difference in the concentration of the substance between the blood entering and the
blood leaving.
Applied to the whole body and oxygen:
the oxygen consumed by the body per minute equals the cardiac output multiplied by
the difference in oxygen content between the arterial blood leaving the lungs and
the mixed venous blood returning to them.
Rearranged, the cardiac output equals the oxygen consumption divided by the
arteriovenous oxygen content difference. So by measuring the oxygen consumption and
the arterial and mixed venous oxygen contents, the cardiac output can be calculated.
So the Fick principle states that an organ's uptake of a substance equals its blood
flow times the arteriovenous concentration difference;
applied to oxygen for the whole body,
the cardiac output equals the oxygen consumption divided by the arteriovenous
oxygen content difference — a foundational method of measuring cardiac output,
and the basis of several techniques.
Describe the other methods of measuring cardiac output.
Besides the Fick method, cardiac output is measured by several techniques in
clinical practice, each with its principle, accuracy and invasiveness.
The indicator-dilution methods apply the same conservation principle using an
injected indicator: thermodilution, the long-standing clinical standard,
injects a known volume of cold fluid into the right atrium through a pulmonary
artery catheter and measures the resulting temperature change downstream,
from which the output is calculated — a larger output causing a smaller,
briefer change.
Doppler methods use ultrasound to measure the velocity of blood in the aorta,
and with its cross-sectional area derive the flow,
whether by a probe in the oesophagus or by echocardiography.
Pulse-contour analysis derives the stroke volume beat-to-beat from the shape of the
arterial pressure waveform, often after calibration.
Echocardiography estimates output from chamber dimensions and flow.
So cardiac output is measured by the Fick method,
by indicator dilution — chiefly thermodilution via a pulmonary artery catheter;
by Doppler ultrasound of aortic flow; by arterial pulse-contour analysis;
and by echocardiography — a range of methods of differing invasiveness and
accuracy, increasingly favouring the less invasive, for monitoring the circulation.
Describe the venous return curve and the concept of mean systemic filling pressure.
The control of cardiac output cannot be understood from the heart alone,
because the heart can only pump the blood that returns to it,
so the venous return must be considered,
and Guyton expressed this through the venous return curve.
The driving force for venous return is the difference between the mean systemic
filling pressure and the right atrial pressure,
divided by the resistance to venous return.
The mean systemic filling pressure is the pressure that would exist throughout the
systemic circulation if the heart stopped and the pressures equalised — a measure
of the degree of filling of the circulation,
determined by the blood volume and the venous tone.
The venous return curve plots venous return against the right atrial pressure:
as the right atrial pressure falls, venous return increases,
because the pressure gradient driving it increases;
but when the right atrial pressure falls below zero,
the veins entering the chest collapse, limiting further increase.
So venous return is driven by the difference between the mean systemic filling
pressure — the filling of the circulation,
set by volume and venous tone — and the right atrial pressure;
the venous return curve shows venous return rising as right atrial pressure falls,
until the great veins collapse — the circulation's side of the control of cardiac
output.
How do the cardiac function and venous return curves interact to determine cardiac
output?
The cardiac output and the right atrial pressure at any moment are determined by
the simultaneous interaction of two relationships,
which Guyton represented by plotting them together, giving a powerful framework.
The first is the cardiac function curve — the Frank-Starling relationship — showing
that the heart's output increases as the right atrial pressure,
its filling pressure, increases.
The second is the venous return curve,
showing that venous return decreases as the right atrial pressure increases.
These two curves are plotted on the same axes,
both relating flow to right atrial pressure but in opposite directions.
Because in the steady state the output of the heart must equal the venous return to
it, the operating point of the circulation is where the two curves intersect,
which defines the cardiac output and the right atrial pressure simultaneously.
Shifting either curve — by a change in contractility,
in blood volume or venous tone, or in resistance — moves the intersection,
predicting the resulting cardiac output.
So the cardiac function and venous return curves, plotted together,
intersect at the point where output equals venous return,
defining the operating cardiac output and right atrial pressure;
changes in the heart or the circulation shift the curves and the intersection — an
integrative framework showing that cardiac output is determined by the heart and
the circulation together.
Describe the determinants of oxygen delivery and consumption and their balance.
The ultimate purpose of the cardiac output is to deliver oxygen to the tissues,
so the cardiac output must be considered together with oxygen delivery and
consumption, whose balance determines the adequacy of the circulation.
Oxygen delivery is the amount of oxygen carried to the tissues per minute — the
product of the cardiac output and the arterial oxygen content,
normally about a litre a minute.
Oxygen consumption is the amount the tissues actually use,
normally about a quarter of that delivered,
so that the venous blood returns still substantially saturated.
The body normally maintains delivery well above consumption, a reserve;
if delivery falls — from a fall in cardiac output,
haemoglobin or saturation — the tissues compensate by extracting a greater
fraction, maintaining consumption until extraction is maximal,
beyond which consumption falls and becomes delivery-dependent,
with anaerobic metabolism and lactate production.
The balance is reflected in the mixed venous oxygen saturation.
So oxygen delivery, the product of cardiac output and arterial content,
normally exceeds oxygen consumption severalfold;
a fall in delivery is compensated by increased extraction until this is maximal,
beyond which consumption falls — the balance,
monitored by the mixed venous saturation,
determining the adequacy of the circulation,
and the rationale for optimising cardiac output.
Classify the types of shock.
Shock is the state of inadequate tissue perfusion and oxygen delivery to meet the
tissues' needs, and it is classified by its mechanism into types,
a framework essential to diagnosis and treatment,
derived from the determinants of the circulation.
Hypovolaemic shock results from a loss of circulating volume — from haemorrhage or
fluid loss — reducing venous return and so cardiac output.
Cardiogenic shock results from failure of the heart as a pump — from infarction,
arrhythmia or severe valve disease — so that despite adequate filling the output is
inadequate.
Obstructive shock results from a mechanical obstruction to the circulation — such
as a massive pulmonary embolism, a tension pneumothorax,
or cardiac tamponade — impeding filling or ejection.
Distributive shock results from a loss of vascular tone with maldistribution of
flow — as in sepsis, anaphylaxis or spinal injury — so that the resistance falls
and the circulation is inadequately filled despite a normal or high output.
So shock is inadequate tissue perfusion,
classified as hypovolaemic — from volume loss; cardiogenic — from pump failure;
obstructive — from mechanical obstruction;
and distributive — from loss of vascular tone;
a classification by mechanism that directs the diagnosis and the specific treatment
of the failing circulation.
Describe the concept of preload responsiveness and how it is assessed.
Preload responsiveness is the question, central to managing the circulation,
of whether increasing the preload by giving fluid will actually increase the
cardiac output, and its physiology rests on the Frank-Starling curve.
A patient is preload-, or fluid-, responsive if the heart is operating on the
steep, ascending part of the Starling curve,
so that an increase in filling produces a worthwhile increase in stroke volume;
if it is on the flat part, fluid will not help and may cause harm by congestion.
Because static measures such as the central venous pressure predict this poorly,
dynamic measures are used, which exploit the heart-lung interaction during
positive-pressure ventilation: the cyclical changes in intrathoracic pressure cause
cyclical changes in venous return and so in stroke volume,
and a large respiratory variation in the stroke volume or arterial pulse pressure
indicates a responsive heart on the steep part of the curve.
A passive leg raise, giving a reversible internal fluid bolus, tests it directly.
So preload responsiveness depends on whether the heart is on the steep part of the
Starling curve, predicted not by static pressures but by dynamic measures — the
respiratory variation in stroke volume or pulse pressure,
or the response to a passive leg raise — the basis of rational,
goal-directed fluid therapy.
Describe the cardiovascular response to exercise.
The response to exercise is the supreme example of the integrated regulation of the
cardiovascular system, which can increase its oxygen delivery several-fold to meet
the demands of the working muscle.
The cardiac output rises greatly — up to four or five-fold or more in the trained —
through increases in both heart rate, the major factor, and stroke volume;
the heart rate rises through reduced vagal and increased sympathetic activity,
and the stroke volume through increased contractility and venous return.
The circulation is redistributed: the vessels of the working muscle dilate through
local metabolic mechanisms, greatly increasing muscle blood flow,
while those of the gut and other non-essential beds constrict,
diverting flow to the muscle.
Venous return is enhanced by the muscle and respiratory pumps and venoconstriction.
The arterial pressure rises modestly,
and the increased oxygen extraction by the muscle widens the arteriovenous oxygen
difference.
These are coordinated by central command, the muscle reflexes and the baroreceptors.
So in exercise the cardiac output rises several-fold through increased heart rate
and stroke volume, the circulation is redistributed to the working muscle by local
dilatation and visceral constriction, venous return and extraction increase,
all integrated by neural control — a coordinated response delivering greatly
increased oxygen, and the basis of cardiovascular reserve and fitness.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Cardiac output (blood pumped per minute,
~5 L/min) = heart rate × stroke volume;
the heart rate is set by the pacemaker and autonomic control,
the stroke volume by preload, afterload and contractility; it is Second,
Preload is the end-diastolic stretch (set by venous return);
Frank-Starling's law states greater stretch gives a greater force and stroke volume
(via the length-tension relationship and calcium sensitivity) — the rising
Frank-Starling curve automatically matching output to venous return and balancing
the ventricles.
Third, Afterload is the load opposing ejection (chiefly arterial pressure/systemic
vascular resistance); a higher afterload reduces stroke volume and,
by Laplace's law (wall tension ∝ pressure × radius ÷ wall thickness),
raises wall stress and oxygen demand.
Contractility is the intrinsic, load-independent strength of contraction (raised by
sympathetic activity/catecholamines/inotropes, lowered by disease, hypoxia,
acidosis and anaesthetics), best indexed by the slope of the end-systolic
pressure-volume relationship.
Fourth, Heart rate raises output but excessive rates shorten filling and reduce
stroke volume; an effective coordinated rhythm with the atrial contribution to
filling optimises output (loss in atrial fibrillation reduces it).
Venous return must equal cardiac output,
driven by the gradient from the mean systemic filling pressure to the right atrium;
the intersection of the cardiac function and venous return curves defines the
operating point.
Fifth, Cardiac output is regulated by integrating the intrinsic Frank-Starling
matching of output to venous return with extrinsic autonomic/hormonal control of
rate, contractility and venous tone; anaesthesia disturbs all these,
so the anaesthetist maintains output and perfusion by manipulating preload
(fluids), afterload (vaso-active drugs),
contractility (inotropes) and rate — the framework for treating hypotension and
shock.
Thank you. That concludes the station.